One day Hofuku said to his disciples, "When one passes behind the temple, he meets 
Chang and Li, but he does not see anyone in front of it. Why is this? Which of the two 
roads is better?" A monk answered, "Something must be wrong with the sight. 
Nothing is gained without seeing." The Master scolded the monk, saying, "Stupid, the 
temple is always like this." The monk said, "If it were not the temple, one should see 
something." The Master said, "I am talking about the temple and nothing else." 

When you can do nothing. What can you do? 

One day Chao-chou fell down in the snow, and called out, "Help me up! Help me up!" 
A monk came and lay down beside him. Chao-chao got up and went away. 

What is your original face before your mother and father are born? 

As the roof was leaking, a Zen master told two monks to bring something to catch the 
water. One brought a tub, the other a basket. The first was severely reprimanded, the 
second highly praised. 

When the MANY is reduced to ONE, To what is the ONE reduced? 

One day, Jizo received one of Hofuku's disciples and asked him,"How does your 
teacher instruct you?" "My teacher instructs me to shut my eyes and see no evil thing; 
to cover my ears and hear no evil sound; to stop my mind-activities and form no 
wrong ideas," the monk replied. "I do not ask you to shut your eyes," Jizo said, "but 
you do not see a thing. I do not ask you to cover your ears, but you do not hear a 
sound. I do not ask you to cease your mind-activities, but you do not form any idea at all." 

Once Ma-tsu and Pai-chang were walking along and they saw some wild ducks fly by. 
"What is that?" the Master asked. "Wild ducks," Pai-chang replied. 
"Where have they gone?" "They've flown away, Pai-chang said. 
The Master then twisted Pia-chang's nose, and when Pia-chang cried out in pain, 
Ma-tsu said, "When have they ever flown away?" 

A monk asked Master Haryo, "What is the way?" 
Haryo said, "An open-eyed man falling down a well." 

Unmon said: "I do not ask you about fifteen days ago. But what about fifteen days 
hence? Come, say a word about this" 
Since none of the monks answered, he answered for them: "Every day is a good day." 

A monk asked Tozan, "How can we escape the cold and heat?" 
Tozan replied, "Why not go where there is no cold and heat?" 
"Is there such a place?" the monk asked.  
Tozan commented, "When cold, be thoroughly cold; when hot, be hot through and through." 

Shuzan held out his short staff and said, "If you call this a short staff,
you oppose its reality. If you do not call it a short staff, you ignore the fact.
Now what do you wish to call this?" 

Zen Master Unmon said: "The world is vast and wide. Why do you put on your robes 
at the sound of a bell?" 

A monk asked Kegon, "How does an enlightened one return to the ordinary world?" 
Kegon replied, "A broken mirror never reflects again; fallen flowers never go back to 
the old branches." 

One day as Manjusri stood outside the gate, the Buddha called to him, "Manjusri, 
Manjusri, why do you not enter?" Manjusri replied, "I do not see myself as outside. 
Why enter" 

Dogo paid a visit to his sick fellow monk, Ungan. "Where can I see you again if you 
die and leave only your corpse?" Dogo asked. "I will meet you where nothing dies," 
Ungan replied. Dogo criticized his response saying, "What you should have said is 
that there is no place where nothing is born and nothing dies and that we need not see 
each other at all." 

Te-shan was sitting outside doing zazen. Lung-t'an asked him why he didn't go back 
home. Te-shan answered,"Because it's dark."Lung-t'an then lit a candle and handed it 
to him. As Te-shan was about to take it, Lung-t'an blew it out. Te-shan had a sudden 
realization, and bowed. 

Elder Ting asked Lin-chi, "Master, What is the great meaning of Buddha's teachings?" 
Lin-chi came down from his seat, slapped Ting and pushed him away. Ting was 
stunned and stood motionless. A monk nearby said, "Ting, why do you not bow?" At 
that moment Ting attained great enlightenment. 

It is like a water buffalo passing through a window. Its head, horns and four legs all 
pass through. Why can't its tail pass through, too? 

Chokan had a very beautiful daughter named Seijo. He also had a handsome young 
cousin named Ochu. Joking, he would often comment that they would make a fine 
married couple. Actually, he planned to give his daughter in marriage to another man. 
But young Seijo and Ochu took him seriously; they fell in love and thought 
themselves engaged. One day Chokan announced Seijo's betrothal to the other man. 
In rage and despair, Ochu left by boat. After several days journey, much to his 
astonishment and joy he discovered that Seijo was on the boat with him! 
They went to a nearby city where they lived for several years and had two children. 
But Seijo could not forget her father; so Ochu decided to go back with her and ask the 
father's forgiveness and blessing. When they arrived, he left Seijo on the boat and 
went to the father's house. he humbly apologized to the father for taking his daughter 
away and asked forgiveness for them both. 
"What is the meaning of all this madness?" the father exclaimed. Then he related that 
after Ochu had left, many years ago, his daughter Seijo had fallen ill and had lain 
comatose in bed since. Ochu assured him that he was mistaken, and, in proof, he 
brought Seijo from the boat. When she entered, the Seijo lying ill in bed rose to meet 
her, and the two became one. 
Zen Master Goso, referrring to the legend, observed, "Seijo had two souls, one always 
sick at home and the other in the city, a married woman with two children. Which was 
the true soul?" 

Kisan paid a visit to Ganto, who was living in quiet seclusion, and asked, "Brother, 
are you getting two meals regularly?" "The fourth son of the Cho family supports me, 
and I am very much obliged to him," said Ganto. "If you do not do your part well, you 
will be born as an ox in the next life and will have to repay him for what you owed 
him in this life," Kisan cautioned. 
Ganto put his fists on his forehead but said nothing. "If you mean horns," Kisan said, 
"you must stick out your fingers on top of your head." But before he finished 
speaking, Ganto shouted, "Hey!" Kisan did not understand his meaning and said, "If 
you know something deeper, why don't you explain it to me?" Ganto hissed at him 
and said, "You have been studying Buddhism for thirty years, as I have, and you are 
still wandering around. I have nothing to do with you. Just get out." And with these 
words he shut the door in Kisan's face. 
The fourth son of the Cho family happened to be passing by and, out of pity, took 
Kisan to his home. "Thirty years ago we were close friends," Kisan said sorrowfully, 
"but now he has attained something higher than I have and will not impart it to me." 
That night Kisan could not sleep. He got up and went to Ganto's house. "Brother," he 
implored, "please be kind and preach the Dharma for me." Ganto opened the door and 
disclosed the teaching. The next morning Kisan returned home, happy with 
attainment. 

Emperor Wu of China was a very benevolent Buddhist. He built many temples and 
monasteries, educated many monks, and performed countless philanthropic deeds in 
the name of Buddhism. He asked the great teacher Bodhidharma, "What merit is there 
in my good works?" Bodhidharma replied, "None whatsoever." The Emperor then 
asked, "What is the Primal meaning of Holy Reality?" Bodhidharma answered, 
"Emptiness, not holiness." The Emperor then queried, "Who, then, is this confronting 
me?" "I do not know," was Bodhidharma's reply. Since the Emperor did not 
understand, Bodhidharma left his kingdom. 
Later, the Emperor related this conversation to an adviser, Prince Shiko. Shiko 
reprimanded him, saying that Bodhidharma was a great teacher possessed of the 
highest truth. The Emperor, filled with regret, dispatched a messenger to entreat 
Bodhidharma to return. But Shiko warned, "Even if all the people in the land went, 
that one will never return." 

Wakuan complained when he saw a picture of bearded Bodhidharma, "Why hasn't 
that fellow a beard?" 

One day Banzan was walking through a market. He overheard a customer say to the 
butcher, "Give me the best piece of meat you have." "Everything in my shop is the 
best," replied the butcher. "You can not find any piece of meat that is not the best." At 
these words, Banzan was enlightened. 

A philosopher asked Buddha: "Without words, without silence, will you tell me the 
truth?" The Buddha sat quietly. The philosopher then bowed and thanked the Buddha, 
saying, "With your loving kindness I have cleared away my delusions and entered the 
true path." After the philosopher had gone, Ananda asked Buddha what the 
philosopher had attained. The Buddha commented, "A good horse runs even at the 
shadow of the whip." 

Sekiso lived and taught on the Southern Mountain, and Kankei lived and taught on the 
Northern Mountain. One day, a monk came from the Northern Monastery to the 
Southern Monastery in search of teaching. Sekiso said to him, "My Southern 
Monastery is no better than the Monastery in the North." The monk did not know 
what reply to make. When he returned to Kankei and told him the story, Kankei said, 
"You should have told him that I am ready to enter Nirvana any day." 

Once upon a time, Manjusri, the Bodhisattva of Wisdom, went to an assemblage of 
Buddhas. By the time he arrived, all had departed except for the Buddha Sakyamuni 
and one girl. She was seated in a place of highest honor, deep in meditation. Manjusri 
asked the Buddha how it was possible for a mere girl to attain a depth of mediation 
that even he could not attain. The Buddha said, "Bring her out of meditation and ask 
her yourself." 
So Manjusri walked around the girl three times [a gesture of reverence], then snapped 
his fingers. She remained deep in meditation. He then tried rousing her by invoking 
all his magic powers; he even transported her to a high heaven. All was to no avail, so 
deep was her concentration. But suddenly, up from below the earth sprang Momyo, an 
unenlightened one. He snapped his fingers once, and the girl came out of her 
meditation. 

Stubbs addressed an assembly of monks: "The Real Way is not difficult, but it dislikes 
the Relative. If there is but little speech, it is about the Relative or it is about the 
Absolute. This old monk is not within the Absolute. Do you value this or not?" A 
monk said to him, "If you are not within the Absolute, how can you judge its value?" 
Stubbs said, "Neither do I know that." The monk argued, "Your Reverence, if you do 
not yet know, how is it that you say you are not within the Absolute?" Stubbs said, 
"Your questioning is effective. Finish your worship and leave." 

A monk saw a turtle in the garden of Daizui's monastery and asked the teacher, "All 
beings cover their bones with flesh and skin. Why does this being cover its flesh and 
skin with bones?" Master Daizui took off one of his sandals and covered the turtle 
with it. 

A monk asked Chimon, "Before the lotus blossom has emerged from the water, what 
is it?" Chimon said, "A lotus blossom." The monk pursued, "After it has come out of 
the water, what is it?" Chimon replied, "Lotus leaves." 

Pupil: How do I achieve absolute silence, complete calm?  
Master: When I cup my ears, like so, I hear the wind. 

Hiker: Why do you go without shoes? Do not your feet give you pain in this snow?  
Monk: My feet give me pain in this snow. 

Pupil: Where is the source of all silence?  
Master: Keep talking. 

The master climbed a fruit tree and began eating an apple from the topmost branch, 
swaying precariously in the wind.  
Pupil, from below: Why have you risked your safety to eat from that apple? Is it the 
sweetest because it is the highest?  
Master: There is no other fruit on the tree. 

A monk met an old friend he had not seen for many years. The friend chided him for 
having aged and lost his hair. The monk replied, "It was never there, my young 
friend." 

Pupil (concerned): Master! How did you get the bruise on your forehead?  
Master (laughing): Turning too quickly, I hit my own head! 

A monk returned from a walking meditation in the forest holding a dead raccoon in 
his arms. A pupil came out to greet him, saying "Where is the life of this creature?"  
The monk handed him the raccoon. 

Pupil: Master, if Tao is the way, but the way has no name, why do we call it Tao?  
Master: Tao. 

One day Chuang-tzu and a friend were walking along a riverbank. "How delightfully 
the fishes are enjoying themselves in the water!" Chuang-tzu exclaimed.  
"You are not a fish," his friend said. "How do you know whether or not the fishes are 
enjoying themselves?"  
"You are not me," Chuang-tzu said. "How do you know that I do not know that the 
fishes are enjoying themselves?"

Two monks were once travelling together down a muddy road. A heavy rain was 
falling. Coming around a bend, they met a lovely girl in a silk kimono and sash, 
unable to cross the intersection.  
"Come on, girl," said the first monk. Lifting her in his arms, he carried her over the mud.  
The second monk did not speak again until that night when they reached a lodging 
temple. Then he no longer could restrain himself. "We monks don't go near females," 
he said. "It is dangerous. Why did you do that?"  
"I left the girl there, the first monk said. "Are you still carrying her?" 

What is the color of wind? 

When making your choice in life, do not neglect to live.

The most terrifying thing is to accept oneself completely. 

What is troubling us is the tendency to believe that the mind is like a little man within. 

A heavy snowfall disappears into the sea. What silence! 

A man walking across a field encounters a tiger. He fled, the tiger chasing after him. 
Coming to a cliff, he caught hold of a wild vine and swung himself over the edge. The 
tiger sniffed at him from above. Terrified, the man looked down to where, far below, 
another tiger had come, waiting to eat him. Two mice, one white and one black, little 
by little began to gnaw away at the vine. The man saw a luscious strawberry near him. 
Grasping the vine in one hand, he plucked the strawberry with the other. How sweet it 
tasted! 

Water which is too pure has no fish. 

If you wish to drown, do not torture yourself with shallow water. 

The fundamental delusion of humanity is to suppose that I am here and you are out 
there. 

A monk asked Stubbs, a Chinese Zen master: `Has a dog Buddha-nature or not?' 
Stubbs answered: `Mu.' 

Once when Hyakujo delivered some Zen lectures an old man attended them, unseen 
by the monks. At the end of each talk when the monks left so did he. But one day he 
remained after they had gone, and Hyakujo asked him: `Who are you?' 
The old man replied: `I am not a human being, but I was a human being when the 
Kashapa Buddha preached in this world. I was a Zen master and lived on this 
mountain. At that time one of my students asked me whether the enlightened man is 
subject to the law of causation. I answered him: "The enlightened man is not subject 
to the law of causation." For this answer evidencing a clinging to absoluteness I 
became a fox for five hundred rebirths, and I am still a fox. Will you save me from 
this condition with your Zen words and let me get out of a fox's body? Now may I ask 
you: Is the enlightened man subject to the law of causation?' 
Hyakujo said: `The enlightened man is one with the law of causation.' 
At the words of Hyakujo the old man was enlightened. `I am emancipated,' he said, 
paying homage with a deep bow. `I am no more a fox, but I have to leave my body in 
my dwelling place behind this mountain. Please perform my funeral as a monk.' Then
he disappeared. 
The next day Hyakujo gave an order through the chief monk to prepare to attend the 
funeral of a monk. `No one was sick in the infirmary,' wondered the monks. `What 
does our teacher mean?' 
After dinner Hyakujo led the monks out and around the mountain. In a cave, with his 
staff he poked out the corpse of an old fox and then performed the ceremony of 
cremation. 
That evening Hyakujo gave a talk to the monks and told this story about the law of 
causation. 
Obaku, upon hearing this story, asked Hyakujo: `I understand that a long time ago 
because a certain person gave a wrong Zen answer he became a fox for five hundred 
rebirths. Now I was to ask: If some modern master is asked many questions, and he 
always gives the right answer, what will become of him?' 
Hyakujo said: `You come here near me and I will tell you.' 
Obaku went near Hyakujo and slapped the teacher's face with this hand, for he knew 
this was the answer his teacher intended to give him. 
Hyakujo clapped his hands and laughed at the discernment. `I thought a Persian had a 
red beard,' he said, `and now I know a Persian who has a red beard.' 

Gutei raised his finger whenever he was asked a question about Zen. A boy attendant 
began to imitate him in this way. When anyone asked the boy what his master had 
preached about, the boy would raise his finger. 
Gutei heard about the boy's mischief. He seized him and cut off his finger. The boy 
cried and ran away. Gutei called and stopped him. When the boy turned his head to 
Gutei, Gutei raised up his own finger. In that instant the boy was enlightened. 
When Gutei was about to pass from this world he gathered his monks around him. `I 
attained my finger-Zen,' he said, `from my teacher Tenryu, and in my whole life I 
could not exhaust it.' Then he passed away. 

Kyogen said: `Zen is like a man hanging in a tree by his teeth over a precipice. His 
hands grasp no branch, his feet rest on no limb, and under the tree another person 
asks him: `Why does Bodhidharma come to China from India?' 
`If the man in tree does not answer, he fails; and if he does answer, he falls and loses
his life. Now what shall he do?' 

When Buddha was in Grdhrakuta mountain he turned a flower in his fingers and held 
it before his listeners. Every one was silent. Only Maha-Kashapa smiled at this 
revelation, although he tried to control the lines of his face. 
Buddha said: `I have the eye of the true teaching, the heart of Nirvana, the true aspect 
of non-form, and the ineffable stride of Dharma. It is not expressed by words, but 
especially transmitted beyond teaching. This teaching I have given to Maha-Kashapa.' 

A monk told Stubbs: `I have just entered the monastery. Please teach me.' 
Stubbs asked: `Have you eaten your rice porridge?' 
The monk replied: `I have eaten.' 
Stubbs said: `Then you had better wash your bowl.' 
At that moment the monk was enlightened. 

Getsuan said to this students: `Keichu, the first wheel-maker of China, made two 
wheels of fifty spokes each. Now, suppose you removed the nave uniting the spokes. 
What would become of the wheel? And had Keichu done this, could he be called the 
master wheel-maker?' 

A monk asked Seijo: `I understand that a Buddha who lived before recorded history 
sat in meditation for ten cycles of existence and could not realize the highest truth, 
and so could not become fully emancipated. Why was this so?' 
Seijo replied: `Your question is self-explanatory.' 
The monk asked: `Since the Buddha was meditating, why could he not fulfill Buddahood?' 
Seijo said: `He was not a Buddha.' 

A monk named Seizei asked of Sozan: `Seizei is alone and poor. Will you give him support?' 
Sozan asked: `Seizei?' 
Seizei responded: `Yes, sir.' 
Sozan said: `You have Zen, the best wine in China, and alrady have finished three 
cups, and still you are saying that they did not even wet your lips.' 

Stubbs went to a place were a monk had retired to meditate and asked him: `What is, is what?' 
The monk raised his fist. 
Stubbs replied: `Ships cannot remain where the water is too shallow.' And he left. 
A few days later Stubbs went again to visit the monk and asked the same question. 
The monk answered the same way. 
Stubbs said: `Well given, well taken, well killed, well save.' And he bowed to the monk. 

Zuigan called out to himself every day: `Master.' 
Then he answered himself: `Yes, sir.' 
And after that he added: `Become sober.' 
Again he answered: `Yes, sir.' 
`And after that,' he continued, `do not be deceived by others.' 
`Yes, sir; yes, sir,' he answered. 

Tokusan went to the dining room from the meditation hall holding his bowl. Seppo 
was on duty cooking. When he met Tokusan he said: `The dinner drum is not yet 
beaten. Where are you going with your bowl?' 
So Tokusan returned to his room. 
Seppo told Ganto about this. Ganto said: `Old Tokusan did not understand the ultimate truth.' 
Tokusan heard of this remark and asked Ganto to come to him. `I have heard,' he said, 
`you are not approving my Zen.' Ganto admitted this indirectly. Tokusan said nothing. 
The next day Tokusan delivered an entirely different kind of lecture to the monks. 
Ganto laughed and clapped his hands, saying: `I see our old man understands the 
ultimate truth indeed. None in China can surpass him.' 

Nansen saw the monks of the eastern and western halls fighting over a cat. He seized 
the cat and told the monks: `If any of you say a good word, you can save the cat.' 
No one answered. So Nansen boldly cut the cat in two pieces. 
That evening Stubbs returned and Nansen told him about this. Stubbs removed his 
sandals and, placing them on his head, walked out. 
Nansen said: `If you had been there, you could have saved the cat.' 

Tozan went to Ummon. Ummon asked him where he had come from. 
Tozan said: `From Sato village.' 
Ummon asked: `In what temple did you remain for the summer?' 
Tozan replied: `The temple of Hoji, south of the lake.' 
`When did you leave there?' asked Ummon, wondering how long Tozan would 
continue with such factual answers. 
`The twenty-fifth of August,' answered Tozan. 
Ummon said: `I should give you three blows with a stick, but today I forgive you.' 
The next day Tozan bowed to Ummon and asked: `Yesterday you forgave me three 
blows. I do not know why you thought me wrong.' 
Ummon, rebuking Tozan's spiritless responses, said: `You are good for nothing. You 
simply wander from one monastery to another.' 
Before Ummon's words were ended Tozan was enlightened. 

Chu, called Kokushi, the teacher of the emperor, called to his attendant: `Oshin.' 
Oshin answered: `Yes.' 
Chu repeated, to test his pupil: `Oshin.' 
Oshin repeated: `Yes.' 
Chu called: `Oshin.' 
Oshin answered: `Yes.' 
Chu said `I ought to apologize for you for all this calling, but really you ought to 
apologize to me.' 

A monk asked Tozan when he was weighing some flax: `What is Buddha?' 
Tozan said: `This flax weighs three pounds.' 

Stubbs asked Nansen: `What is the path?' 
Nansen said: `Everyday life is the path.' 
Stubbs asked: `Can it be studied?' 
Nansen said: `If you try to study, you will be far away from it.' 
Stubbs asked: `If I do not study, how can I know it is the path?' 
Nansen said: `The path does not belong to the perception world, neither does it belong 
to the nonperception world. Cognition is a delusion and noncognition is senseless. If 
you want to reach the true path beyond doubt, place yourself in the same freedom as 
sky. You name it neither good nor not-good.' 
At these words Stubbs was enlightened. 

Shogen asked: `Why does the enlightened man not stand on his feet and explain 
himself?' And he also said: `It is not necessary for speech to come from the tongue.' 

A monk asked Ummon: `What is Buddha?' Ummon answered him: `Dried dung.'

Anada asked Kashapa: `Buddha gave you the golden-woven robe of successorship. 
What else did he give you?' 
Kashapa said: `Ananda.' 
Ananda answered: `Yes, brother.' 
Said Kashapa: `Now you can take down my preaching sign and put up your own.' 

When he became emancipated the sixth patriach received from the fifth patriach the 
bowl and robe given from the Buddha to his successors, generation after generation. 
A monk named E-myo out of envy pursued the patriach to take this great treasure 
away from him. The sixth patriach placed the bowl and robe on a stone in the road 
and told E-myo: `These objects just symbolize the faith. There is no use fighting over 
them. If you desire to take them, take them now.' 
When E-myo went to move the bowl and robe they were as heavy as mountains. He 
could not budge them. Trembling for shame he said: `I came wanting the teaching, not 
the material treasures. Please teach me.' 
The sixth patriach said: `When you do not think good and when you do not think not-
good, what is your true self?' 
At these words E-myo was illumined. Perspiration broke out all over his body. He 
cried and bowed, saying: `You have given me the secret words and meanings. Is there 
yet a deeper part of the teaching?' 
The sixth patriach replied: `What I have told you is no secret at all. When you realize 
your true self the secret belongs to you.' 
E-myo said: `I was under the fifth patriach for many years but could not realize my 
true self until now. Through your teaching I find the source. A person drinks water 
and knows himself whether it is cold or warm. May I call you my teacher?' 
The sixth patriach replied: `We studied together under the fifth patriach. Call him 
your teacher, but just treasure what you have attained.' 

A monk asked Fuketsu: `Without speaking, without silence, how can you express the truth?' 
Fuketsu observed: `I always remember spring-time in southern China. The birds sing 
among innumerable kinds of fragrant flowers.' 

In a dream Kyozen went to Maitreya's Pure Land. He recognized himself seated in the 
third seat in the abode of Maitreya. Someone announced: `Today the one who sits in 
the third seat will preach.' 
Kyozen arose and, hitting the gavel, said: `The truth of Mahayana teaching is 
transcendent, above words and thought. Do you understand?' 

Hogen of Seiryo monastery was about to lecture before dinner when he noticed that 
the bamboo screen lowered for meditation had not been rolled up. He pointed to it. 
Two monks arose from the audience and rolled it up. 
Hogen, observing the physical moment, said: `The state of the first monk is good, not 
that of the other.' 

A monk asked Nansen: `Is there a teaching no master ever preached before?' 
Nansen said: `Yes, there is.' 
`What is it?' asked the monk. 
Nansen replied: `It is not mind, it is not Buddha, it is not things.' 

Tokusan was studying Zen under Ryutan. One night he came to Ryutan and asked 
many questions. The teacher said: `The night is getting old. Why don't you retire?' 
So Tukusan bowed and opened the screen to go out, observing: `It is very dark 
outside.' 
Ryutan offered Tokusan a lighted candle to find his way. Just as Tokusan received it, 
Ryutan blew it out. At that moment the mind of Tokusan was opened. 
`What have you attained?' asked Ryutan. 
`From now on,' said Tokusan, `I will not doubt the teacher's words.' 
The next day Ryutan told the monks at his lecture: `I see one monk among you. His 
teeth are like the sword tree, his mouth is like the blood bowl. If you hit him hard with 
a big stick, he will not even so much as look back at you. Someday he will mount the 
highest peak and carry my teaching there.' 
On that day, in front of the lecture hall, Tokusan burned to ashes his commentaries on 
the sutras. He said: `However abstruse the teachings are, in comparison with this 
enlightenment they are like a single hair to the great sky. However profound the 
complicated knowledge of the world, compared to this enlightenment it is like one 
drop of water to the great ocean.' Then he left the monastry. 

Two monks were arguing about a flag. One said: `The flag is moving.' 
The other said: `The wind is moving.' 
The sixth patriach happened to be passing by. He told them: `Not the wind, not the 
flag; mind is moving.' 

Daibai asked Baso: `What is Buddha?' 
Baso said: `This mind is Buddha.' 

A travelling monk asked an old woman the road to Taizan, a popular temple supposed 
to give wisdom to the one who worships there. The old woman said: `Go straight 
ahead.' When the monk proceeded a few steps, she said to herself: `He also is a 
common church-goer.' 
Someone told this incident to Stubbs, who said: `Wait until I investigate.' The next day 
he went and asked the same question, and the old woman gave the same answer. 
Stubbs remarked: `I have investigated that old woman.' 

Q: How many Zen masters does it take to change a lightbulb?
A: A tree in a golden forest.

Q: How many Zen masters does it take to change a lightbulb?
A: Two: one to change the bulb and one not to change it.

Q: How many Zen masters does it take to change a lightbulb?
A: None. Zen masters carry their own light.

A monk once asked Jo Ju, "I have just entered the monastery. Please teach me, Master."
Jo Ju said, "Have you had breakfast?"
"Yes, I have," replied the monk.
"Then," said Jo Ju, "wash your bowls."
The monk was enlightened.

Master Seong Am Eon used to call to himself every day, "Master!" and would answer, "Yes?"
"You must keep clear!"
"Yes!"
"Never be deceived by others, any day, any time!"
"Yes! Yes!" 

Master Hyang Eom said, "It is like a man up a tree who is hanging from a branch by his teeth;
his hands cannot grasp a bough, his feet cannot touch the tree; he is tied and bound.
Another man under the tree asks him, 'Why did Bodhidharma come to China?'
If he does not answer, he evades his duty and will be killed. If he answers, he will lose his life.

A man came into the Zen Center smoking a cigarette, blowing smoke in the Buddha-statue's
face and dropping ashes on its lap. The abbot came in, saw the man, and said,
"Are you crazy? Why are you dropping ashes on the Buddha?"
The man answered, "Buddha is everything. Why not?"
The abbot couldn't answer and went away. 

The sun in the sky shines everywhere. Why does a cloud obscure it? 

Everyone has a shadow following them. How can you not step on your shadow? 

The whole universe is on fire. Through what kind of samadhi can you escape being burned? 

Seung Sahn visited his teacher, Zen Master Ko Bong, who asked him many difficult kong-ans
which Seung Sahn answered easily. After many exchanges, Ko Bong said, 
"Alright, one last question. The mouse eats cat food, but the cat bowl is broken. What does this mean?" 
Seung gave many answers, but to each Ko Bong only said, "No." 
Seung Sahn became angry and frustrated, completely stuck. 
After staring into Ko Bong's eyes for 50 minutes, his mind broke open like lightning striking. 

Zen Master Seung Sahn wrote: "If you pass all Ten Gates, then this world will become yours. 
Becoming yours means you will attain the function of freedom from life or death. 
Then correct function, correct relationship, correct situation are possible. 
If you pass these Ten Gates, I will give you a present of an Eleventh Gate." 

Three men are walking. The first man makes a sword sound; the next man takes out a handkerchief;
the third man waves his hand. 

One day, Zen Master Man Gong sat on the high rostrum and gave the speech to mark the end of 
the three month winter retreat. "All winter long you monks practiced very hard. 
That's wonderful! As for me, I had nothing to do, so I made a net. 
This net is made out of a special cord. It is very strong and can catch all Buddhas, 
Patriarchs and human beings. It catches everything. How do you get out of this net? 
Some students shouted, "KATZ!" Others hit the floor or raised a fist. 
One said, "The sky is blue, the grass is green." Another said, 
"Already got out; how are you, great Zen Master?" From the back of the room a monk shouted, 
"Don't make net!" 
Many answers were given, but to each Man Gong only replied, "Aha! I've caught a BIG fish!" 

One day when the novice Hofuku and the monk Chokei were walking in the hills, 
the novice pointed to a hilltop saying, "Surely that is the top of Mount Myoho!" 
Chokei replied, "True enough, but what a pity you need mention it." 
Later Hofuku related this conversation to a fellow monk, Kyosei. 
Kyosei commented, "If it were not for the likes of Chokei, there would be rattle-brains everywhere." 
Setcho commented on all of this: "Today, walking in the hills with these fellows, 
what do they really understand? A hundred years from now I don't say there will be 
none who understand, but those who do will be few and far between."

Hakuun, a Chinese Zen Master of the Sung dynasty, wrote a poem:
"Where others dwell,
I do not dwell.
I do not go,
Where others go.
I do not shun
Humankind.
But Black and White
Must be defined."

A monk asked Unmon, "What is your family tradition?" 
Unmon answered, "Oh, it looks like students who wish to come to learn are already outside the gate."

When Gensah was studying Zen under Master Seppo, a brother monk named Ko said, 
"If you can attain something of Zen, I will make an iron boat and sail the high seas." 
Many years later Gensha became a Zen Master, with Ko studying under him as an attendant monk. 
One day Gensha said, "Have you built your iron boat?" Ko remained silent.

One day a young novice said to Patriarch Hogen, "My name is Echo, and I would like to ask 
Your Reverence what is meant by the name Buddha?" 
Hogen merely said, "Oh, so you are Echo, are you?"

Shogen asked, "Why does the enlightened man not stand on his feet and explain himself?" 
He also said, "It is not necessary for speech to come from the tongue." 
And he added, "Why can the enlightened man not cut away the entanglements round his feet?"

Zengetsu, a monk poet, wrote a poem containing the following two verses:
"The snap of two fingers
Makes a sharp sound,
But in hollow vessels
Echoes rebound."
Daizui heard this poem and, on meeting Zengetsu, asked, "What is the meaning?" 
Zengetsu could not answer.

The librarian saw a monk sitting in meditation in his library for a long time. 
At length the librarian asked, "Why do you not read the sutras?" 
The monk answered, "I do not know how to read." 
"Why don't you ask someone who knows?" suggested the librarian. 
The monk stood up, put both hands on his chest in a Zen gesture, 
bowed deeply, and asked politely, "What is this?" The librarian could not tell him.

A monk asked Unmon, "What would the Gautama Buddha have said if there were no one to hear 
and no occasion to teach?" 
Unmon answered, "The opposite of statement."

Master Isan sent for the treasurer, but when he appeared, Isan said, 
"I sent for the treasurer, not you." The treasurer did not know what to say. 
The Master next sent for the chief monk, but when he came, Isan said, 
"I sent for the chief monk, not for you." The chief monk, also, was dumbfounded.

Eno, the sixth patriarch of Zen, received from the fifth patriarch the symbols of authority: 
the bowl and robe. Because of the jealousy of some of the other monks, Eno left the monastery 
at night taking the bowl and robe with him. Some brother monks pursued him, intending to wrest 
the treasured objects from him. 
Among them was a tall, extremely powerful monk named Emyo. Eno knew Emyo was coming, so he sat 
and waited, placing the bowl and robe on a nearby rock. When Emyo appeared, Eno said to him: 
"These objects just symbolize the truth. If you want them, take them." 
But when Emyo tried to lift the bowl and robe, they were as heavy as mountains. 
Trembling with shame, he said: "I came for the teaching, not for material treasures. Please teach me."
Eno instructed him: "Do not think of good; do not think of evil. Show me, instead, your original face."
At those words Emyo's entire body was bathed in perspiration: he was enlightened. 
In gratitude he said, "You have gven me the secret words and meanings. Is there yet a deeper 
part of the teaching?" 
Eno replied: "What I have told you is no secret at all. When you realise your own true self, 
the secret belongs to you."

Gyosan asked Isan, "If a million objects come to you, what should you do?" 
Isan answered, "A green article is not yellow. A long thing is not short. 
Each object manages its own fate. Why should I interfere with them?" 
Gyosan bowed in homage.

Daiju visited the master Baso in China. Baso asked: 
"What do you seek?" 
"Enlightenment," replied Daiju 
"You have your own treasure house. Why do you search outside?" Baso asked. Daiju inquired: 
"Where is my treasure house?" Baso answered: "What you are asking is your treasure house."
Daiju was enlightened! Ever after he urged his friends: 
"Open your own treasure house and use those treasures."

Magoku took up his bell-staff one day and went to Shokyo's temple. There he marched, 
in solemn ritual, three times around Shokyo's meditation seat, rang the bell once, 
and stopped, standing upright. 
Shokyo said, "Very well done." 
Next Magoku went to Nansen's temple and repeated the ritual. But Nansen said, "No good." 
Magoku protested, "Your Reverence, Master Shokyo said 'well done.' Why do you say 'no good'?" 
Nansen replied, "Although Shokyo was right, you are wrong. What you did was a mere shifting of the wind.
In the end it would result in your downfall."

At the beginning of the night's third watch,
before there is moonlight,
Do not be surprised to meet yet not recognise
What is surely a familiar face from the past.

One day Unmon said to his disciples, "This staff of mine has transformed itself into a dragon 
and has swallowed up the universe! Oh, where are the rivers and mountains and the great earth?"

Ryuge asked Master Suibi, "Why did Bodhidharma come West?" 
Suibi said, "Pass me that meditation arm-rest." 
No sooner did Ryuge do so than Suibi hit him over the head with it. 
Ryuge said, "Strike me as you will, that still does not answer my question." 
Next Ryuge went to Master Rinzai and asked the same question. Rinzai said, 
"Please give me that meditation mat." Ryuge handed the rolled-up mat to Rinzai, 
who promptly struck him with it.

A young monk came to Master Kyosei and said, "This disciple is pecking on the inside of the shell, 
ready to hatch. I beg you, sir, help me by knocking on the outside of the shell." 
Kyosei said, "If I do, will you attain life?" 
The monk said, "If I don't that will be your shortcoming, and you will become the laughingstock of the world." 
To this Kyosei replied, "Conceited Fool!"

A monk asked Kyorin, "What was the purpose in Bodhidharma's coming West?" 
Kyorin said, "To meditate a long time and become weary."

A monk asked Funyo, "If there is not a cloud in the sky for ten thousand miles, 
what would you say about that?" 
"I would punish the sky with my stick," Funyo replied. 
"Why blame the sky?" the monk persisted. 
"Because," Funyo answered, "there is no rain when we need it and no fair weather when we should have it."

A Zen student came to Bankei and complained, "Master, I have an ungovernable temper. How can I cure it?" 
"You have something very strange," said Bankei. "Let me see what you have." 
"I can not show it to you just now," said the student. 
"When can you show it to me?" asked Bankei. 
"It arises unexpectedly," replied the other. 
"Then it must not be your own true nature. If it were, you could show it to me at any time. 
It is something that you are not born with. It is not you."

Suiwo, the disciple of Hakuin, was a good teacher. On a certain day a certain pupil came to him, 
and Suiwo gave him the problem, "Hear the sound of one hand." The pupil remained three years, 
but could not pass the test. One night he came to Suiwo in tears. "I must return to my home in shame," 
he said, "for I cannot solve the problem." "Wait another week," said Suiwo. "Meditate constantly." 
Still no enlightenment came to the pupil. "Try for another week," said Suiwo. 
The pupil obeyed, but to no avail. "Still another week," requested Suiwo, but in vain. 
In despair the pupil begged to be released, but Suiwo asked for one more meditation of five days. 
They too were without result. Then Suiwo said: "Mediate for three days longer. 
If you still fail to attain enlightenment, you had better kill yourself." 
On the second day the pupil was enlightened.

A monk asked Ryuge, "What did old Masters attain when they entered the ultimate stage?" 
"They were like burglars sneaking into a vacant house," Ryuge replied.

Goso said: "When you meet a Zen Master on the street, how do you greet him?"

One day Seppo began a lecture to the assembled monks by rolling a wooden ball down from the platform. 
Gensha retrieved the ball and replaced in on the platform. 

A young monk asked his teacher, "What is the meaning of life?" 
His teacher picked up a bowl of water and threw it in the student's face, saying 
"Go wash out your mouth!"

Matajuro Yogyu was the son of a famous swordsman. But his father disowned him because he failed to learn.
So Matajuro went to Mount Futara where he found the famous swordsman Banzo. The master said to him, 
"So you wish to learn swordsmanship under my guidance. But you can not fulfil the requirements." 
"But if I work hard, how many years will it take me to become a master?" the youth persisted. 
"The rest of your life," replied Banzo. 
"I can not wait that long," argued Matajuro. "I am willing to undergo any hardship if only you will
teach me. If I became your servant, how long might it be?" 
"Oh, maybe ten years," Banzo relented. 
"If I work far more intensively, how long would it take me?" 
"Oh, maybe thirty years," said Banzo. 
"Why is that?" asked Matajuro. First you said ten, now you say thirty years. 
I will undergo anything to master this art in the shortest time!" 
"Well," said Banzo, "in that case you will have to stay with me for seventy years. 
A man in such a hurry as you are to get results seldom learns quickly." 
"Very well," declared the youth, who finally understood the teacher. "I agree."
Matajuro was told never to speak of fencing and never to touch a sword. 
He cooked for his master, washed dishes, made his bed, cleaned the yard, cared for the garden, 
all without a word about swordsmanship. Three years passed. Still Matajuro worked on. 
Thinking of his future, he was sad. He had not even begun to learn the art of swordsmanship.
But one day Banzo crept up behind him and gave him a terrific blow with a wooden sword. 
The following day, as Matajuro was cooking rice, Banzo again sprang upon him unexpectedly. 
After that, day and night, Matajuro had to defend himself against unexpected thrusts. 
Not a moment of the day passed during which he did not have to think of the taste of Banzo's sword. 
He began to learn so rapidly that he brought smiles to the face of his master. 
Matajuro became the greatest swordsman in the land.

Bokushu asked a monk, "Where have you recently come from?" 
The monk uttered, "Khats!" 
Bokushu said, "All right, I have now been treated to your mystic cry." 
Again the monk uttered, "Khats!" 
Bokushu said, "Three mystic cries, four mystic cries, what next?" 
The monk said nothing, so Bokushu gave him a clout with his hand and said, "You empty-headed fool!"

Tetsuma, an old woman, visited Isan one day. Isan greeted her: "Welcome, Old Cow!" 
Tetsuma said, "In a few days there will be a ceremony celebrating the restoration of 
Buddhism to imperial favor. Is Your Reverence going to attend?" 
In reply, Isan flung himself, sprawling on the floor. Tetsuma left.

An old crone, having just awakened,
comes upon an ancient mirror
That which is clearly reflected in front of her face 
is none other than her own likeness.
Do not lose sight of your face again 
and go chasing after your shadow.

A monk once asked Shozan, "Is there any phrase that is neither right nor wrong?" 
Shozan answered, "A piece of white cloud does not show any ugliness."

A monk asked Stubbs why Bodhidharma came to China. 
Stubbs answered, "The oak tree in the garden."

Rinzai once said to his monks, "A title-less man lives upon flesh and blood, 
going out or coming in through the gateways of your face. 
Those who have not witnessed this fact, discover it this minute!" 
A monk stood up and asked, "Who is this title-less man?" 
Rinzai suddenly came down from his seat, seized the monk by his robe, and exclaimed, "Speak! Speak!" 
The monk was dumbfounded, so Rinzai slapped him, saying, "This title-less man is good for nothing."

Stefan asked a newly-arrived monk, "Where have you come from?" The monk answered, 
"From the Southern Lake." 
"Is the lake full or not?" inquired Stefan. 
"Not yet," the monk replied. 
"There has been so much rain, why isn't the lake filled?" Stefan asked. The monk remained silent.

Directly points
To man's mind.
He sees into his own nature
And attains Buddhahood.
The eighty-three year old Buddhist monk
Hakuin drew this without his spectacles.

Sitting silently 
Doing nothing 
Spring comes 
And the grass grows by itself.

Master Ungo had many disciples. One, who came from Korea, said to him, 
"I have realised something within me that I cannot describe at all." 
"Why is that so," asked Ungo. "It cannot be difficult." 
"Then you must do it for me," the monk replied. 
Ungo said, "Korea! Korea!" and closed the dialogue. 
Later, a teacher of the Oryu criticised the incident saying, 
"Ungo could not understand the monk at all. 
There was a great sea between them even though they lived in the same monastery."

Mugo, a National Teacher, said, "If one has fancies about sages or mediocrities, 
even though these fancies are as fine as delicate threads, 
they are strong enough to pull him down into the animal kingdom."

Bodhidharma sat facing the wall. His future successor stood in the snow and presented 
his severed arm to Bodhidharma. 
He cried, "My mind is not pacified. Master, pacify my mind." 
Bodhidharma answered, "If you bring me that mind, I will pacify it for you." 
The successor said, "When I search for my mind, I can not hold it." 
Bodhidharma concluded, "Then your mind is pacified already."

Tosotsu built three barriers and made the monks pass through them: 
In studying Zen the aim is to see your own true nature. Now where is your true nature? 
Secondly, when you realise your own true nature, you will be free from birth and death. 
When you shut the light from your eyes and become a corpse, how can you free yourself? 
Thirdly, if you have freed yourself from birth and death, you should know where you are. 
When your body disintegrates into the four elements, where are you?

Three monks - Seppo, Kinzan, and Ganto - were in the temple garden. 
Seppo noticed a pail of water and pointed to it. Kinzan said, 
"The water is clear, and the moon is reflected." 
"No, no," said Seppo, "it is not water, it is not moon." 
Ganto upset the pail.

A student of Kassai came to visit Kotei and bowed. Kotei immediately struck the monk. 
The monk said, "I came especially to see you and paid homage to you with a bow. Why do you strike me?" 
Kotei struck the monk again and chased him from the monastery. The monk returned to his teacher, 
Kassai, and told the story. 
"Do you understand or not?" asked Kassai. 
"No, I don't," answered the monk. 
"Fortunately, you do not understand," Kassai said. "If you did, I would be dumbfounded."

Seppo went to the forest to cut trees with his disciple, Shosei. 
"Do not stop until your ax cuts the very center," Seppo warned. 
"I have cut it," the disciple replied. 
"The old Masters transmitted the teaching to their disciples from heart to heart," 
Seppo continued. "How about your own case?" 
Shosei threw his ax to the ground, saying, "Transmitted." 
The teacher took up his walking stick and struck his beloved disciple. 

A Zen student told Unmon, "Brilliancy of Buddha illuminates the whole universe." 
Before he finished the phrase, Unmon asked, 
"You are reciting another's poem, are you not?" 
"Yes," answered the student. 
"You are sidetracked," said Unmon. 
Afterward, another teacher, Shishin, asked his pupils, 
"At what point did that student go off the track?"

As Tokusan was working in the garden one day, he saw a monk coming up the road. 
Tokusan closed the gate. The monk knocked on the gate, and Tokusan asked, 
"Who is it?" 
The monk answered, "A lion cub." 
Tokusan opened the gate. The monk made a bow, and Tokusan jumped on his back as one 
would jump upon an animal, pinned him down, and said, "You devil! Where have you been?"

Isan said to his disciple, Gyosan, "All day you and I were talking Zen. 
What did we accomplish after all?" 
Gyosan traced a line in the air with his finger. 
Isan said, "It was a good thing you dealt with me. You might cheat anyone else."

Two crossed swords, neither permitting retreat:
Dextrously wielded, like a lotus amidst fire.
Similarly, there is a natural determination
to ascend the heavens.

A monk asked Gensha, "When the old Masters taught the Dharma wordlessly by gesturing 
with a gavel or a priest's wand, were they expressing the ultimate truth of Zen?" 
Gensha answered, "No." 
"Then," the monk continued, "what were they expressing?" 
Gensha raised his priest's wand. 
The monk asked, "What is the ultimate truth of Zen?" 
"Wait until you attain realisation," Gensha replied.

A young physician named Kusuda heard that if one studies Zen, he will not be afraid to die. 
One day he concealed a dagger in his clothing and visited Zen Master Nanin, 
intending to see if the Master was afraid to die. 
When Nanin saw Kusuda, he immediately said, 
"Hello, friend, how are you? We haven't seen each other for a long, long time." 
Perplexed, Kusuda replied, "We have never met before." 
"That's right. I mistook you for another physician," Nanin said. 
With such a beginning, Kusuda lost the chance of surprising him, so he reluctantly asked 
for Zen instruction. Nanin said, 
"If you are a physician, treat your patients well. That is Zen." 
Four times Nanin gave him the same teaching. Kusuda complained he would not come anymore 
if he received the same teaching. So Master Nanin said, 
"I will give you a koan." And he gave him "Stubbs's Mu." 
Kusuda pondered and meditated and worked on it for two years. But Master Nanin kept saying, 
"You are not in yet."
Another year and a half went by. Kusuda's mind became clear, and Mu became truth.

A monk said to Seppo, "I understand that a person in the stage of a Cravaka sees his Buddha-nature
as he sees the moon at night, and a person in the stage of Bodhisattva sees his Buddha-nature as he 
sees the sun at day. Tell me how you see your own Buddha nature." 
In answer, Seppo struck the monk three times with his stick. 
The monk went to another teacher, Ganto, and asked the same question. Ganto slapped him three times.

Muyoku asked Rinzai, "Avalokitesvara has one thousand hands, and each hand has an eye. 
Which is the real eye?" 
Rinzai answered, "Avalokitesvara has one thousand hands, and each hand has an eye. 
Which is the real eye? Now tell me, quick!" 
Muyoku pulled Rinzai from his seat, and sat in his place. 
Rinzai stood up and asked, "Why?" Then he shouted "Khats!" and pulled Muyoku from his seat in turn. 
Muyoku left the room quietly.

One day Seppo told his monks, "There is a cobra in the South Mountain near this temple. 
You should all have a good look at it." 
Chokei said, "The men in this temple today are half dead with fright at the mere thought!" 
One monk pointed to Gensha, indicating that Gensha ought to go. Gensha declined, saying, 
"Let Brother Chokei be the first to go. But even if he does, I won't go." 
"Why not, Your Reverence?" asked the monk. 
"Because," Gensha answered, "one can die without climbing all over the South Mountain." 
Suddenly Unmon startled them all by hurling his staff down violently at Seppo's feet.

In talking to Master Nansen, the official, Rikko, said, "Choho taught that heaven, earth, 
and I spring from the same root and that I and all things are of one essence. Now this is very mystic." 
Nansen took the official to the front garden and pointed to a single flower, saying, 
"People today see this flower like a dream."

There was a monk who called himself 'The Master of Silence'. Actually he was a fraud and had no 
genuine understanding. To sell his humbug Zen he had two eloquent attendant monks
to answer questions for him - but, as if to show his inscrutable silent Zen, 
he himself never uttered a word.
One day, during the absence of his two attendants, a pilgrim came to him and asked:
Master, what is the Buddha? Not knowing what to do, or how to answer,
he looked desperately around in all directions for his missing mouthpieces.
The pilgrim, apparently please and satisfied, thanked the master, and set out again on his journey.
On the road the pilgrim met the two attendant monks on their way home. He began telling them 
enthusiastically what an enlightened being this Master of Silence is. He said: 
I asked him what Buddha is and he immediately turned his face to the east and to the west,
implying that human beings are always looking for Buddha here and there, but actually, 
Buddha is not to be found in any such directions. Oh, what an enlightened master he is, 
and how profound his teaching!
When the attendant monks returned, the Mater of Silence scolded them thus:
Where have you been all this time? A while ago I was embarrassed to death and almost ruined
by an inquisitive pilgrim.

Dogo paid a visit to his sick fellow monk, Ungan. "Where can I see you again if you die and 
leave only your corpse?" Dogo asked. 
"I will meet you where nothing dies," Ungan replied. 
Dogo criticized his response saying, "What you should have said is that there is no place 
where nothing is born and nothing dies and that we need not see each other at all." 

When the Buddha was preaching the Nirvana Sutra, he passed the palm of his hand over his chest, saying, 
"You should observe my body thoroughly, otherwise you will regret it later. 
If you say, 'Buddha enters Parinirvana,' you are not my disciple. 
If you say, 'Buddha does not enter Parinirvana,' you are not my disciple."

Hyakurei the monk and Houn the layman were studying under Baso (successor to Nangaku). 
One day as they met in the monastery corridor, Hyakurei remarked, 
"Our Grandfather in Zen said, 'If one asserts that it is something, one misses it altogether.' 
I wonder if he ever showed it to anyone?" 
Houn answered, "Yes, he did." 
"To whom?" asked Hyakurei. 
Houn then pointed to himself and said, "To this fellow." 
"Your attainment is so beautiful and profound that even Manjusri, the wise, and Subhuti, 
the compassionate one, could not adequately praise it." 
At this Houn said, "Well, I wonder if there is anyone who saw what our Grandfather meant?" 
The monk did not reply; he merely put on his hat and walked away. 
"Watch your step," the layman called after him. But Hyakurei walked on without turning his head.

One monk said to the other, "The fish has flopped out of the net! How will it live?" 
The other said, "When you've got out of the net, I'll tell you."

The pupils of the Tendai school used to study meditation before Zen entered Japan. 
Four of them who were intimate friends promised one another to observe seven days of silence. 
On the first day all were silent. Their meditation had begun auspiciously, 
but when night came and the oil lamps were growing dim one of the pupils could not help 
exclaiming to a servant: 
"Fix those lamps." The second pupil was surprised to hear the first one talk. 
"We are not supposed to say a word," he remarked. 
"You two are stupid. Why did you talk?" asked the third. 
"I am the only one who has not talked," concluded the fourth pupil.

Mokusen lived in a temple in the district of Tanba. One of his temple members complained of his 
wife's stinginess. Mokusen visited the member's wife and put his clenched fist before her face. 
"What do you mean by that?" the surprised woman asked. 
"If my hand were always like that," Mokusen said, "what would you call it?" 
"Deformed," replied the woman. 
Then he opened his hand flat, held it in front of her face, and asked, 
"Suppose it were always like that. What then?" 
"Another kind of deformity," said the wife. 
"If you understand that much, you are a good wife," said Mokusen and left. 
After his visit, the wife helped her husband to distribute as well as to save.

Ikkyu, the Zen master, was very clever even as a boy. His teacher had a precious teacup, 
a rare antique. Ikkyu happened to break this cup and was greatly perplexed. 
Hearing the footsteps of his teacher, he held the pieces of the cup behind him. 
When the master appeared, Ikkyu asked: 
"Why do people have to die?" 
"This is natural," explained the older man. "Everything has to die and has just as long to live." 
Ikkyu, producing the shattered cup, added: 
"It was time for your cup to die."

One day, while lecturing his monks, Unmon asked, "Do you want to meet the old patriarchs?" 
Before anyone could answer, he pointed his stick above their heads and said, 
"The old patriarchs are jumping on your heads." Then he asked, "Do you wish to look them in the eye?" 
He pointed to the ground and said, "They are all under your feet." 
After a moment, he spoke, as though to himself, saying 
"I made a feast in the joss house, but the hungry gods are never satisfied." 

An old monk wrote the Chinese character for mind on the gate, window, and wall of his little hut. 
Hogen corrected him, saying, " The gate should have the character for gate, the window the character 
for window, and the wall the character for wall." 
But Genkaku, a third monk, commented, "The gate manifests itself without a character, so the window 
and wall need no sign at all."

Chinso, a government official, went upstairs with some of his staff members. 
Seeing a group of monks passing below in the road, one of the staff said, "Are they travelling monks?" 
Chinso answered, "No." 
"How do you know they are not?" the staff member asked. 
"Let us examine them!" Chinso replied. Then he shouted, "Hey, venerable monks!" 
At the sound of his voice they all looked up at the window. 
"There!" said Chinso, "didn't I tell you?"

One day a fifty-year old student asked Shinkan, 
"Tendai claims that even grass and trees will become enlightened. How is that possible?" 
Shinkan said, "Of what use is it to discuss how grass and trees become enlightened? 
The question is how you yourself can become so." 
"I never thought of it that way," replied the old student.

A monk asked Kenpo, "The one road of Nirvana leads into the ten quarters. Where does it begin?" 
Kenpo raised his walking stick to draw a horizontal line in the air. 
"Here,", he said. The monk later asked Unmon the same question. Unmon held up his fan and said, 
"This fan leaps up into the thirty-third heaven and hits the presiding deity on the nose, 
then it dives down into the Eastern Sea and hits the holy carp. 
The carp becomes a dragon that brings a flood of rain."

Kyujo was the managing monk of Rakufu's monastery. One day he ordered: 
"Monks from the first to the middle seats, go out to work in the field. 
Remaining monks, go to the mountain for wood." 
"What is Manjusri to do?" asked the chief monk. 
"My order goes only to those monks seated on cushions," answered the managing monk. 
"Manjusri has nothing to do with the order." 
Later, Engo commented on this dialogue and said, 
"If I were questioned that way by the chief monk, I would answer, 
'The path is like a mirror. It does not move itself, but reflects all that comes.'"

Kyosei asked a monk one day, "What is that noise outside?" 
The monk answered, "That is the voice of the raindrops." 
Kyosei said, "All living things are upside down, deceived as to their true nature and pursuing objects." 
The monk then asked, "What about yourself, sir?" 
Kyosei answered, "I am near to not being deceived about myself." 
The monk asked, "What does 'near to not being deceived' mean?" 
Kyosei replied, "Talking in the abstract is easy enough, but explaining reality with words is difficult."

Obaku addressed the monks, "You guzzlers of wine! If I had gone on as many pilgrimages as you 
in search of Zen, wherever should I be today? Don't you know that in all this land there is 
no Zen teacher?" 
A monk came forward and said, "But surely there are those who reform the disciples and govern them.
What about them?" 
Obaku said, "I didn't say there was no Zen, merely that there is no teacher of Zen."

Banzan said to his disciples one day, "In all the three worlds there is no Dharma. 
Where, then, shall we look for Mind?"

One day Stubbs visited Shuyu's lecture hall. He ascended the platform with his staff and looked 
from east to west, then from west to east. 
"What are you doing?" Shuyu asked. 
"I am measuring the water," Stubbs answered. 
"There is no water, not even a drop. How can you measure it?" Shuyu answerd. 
Stubbs leaned his staff against the wall and left.

At Nansen's monastery one day, the cook monk, Tenza, was entertaining the gardener monk, Enju. 
While they were eating, they heard a bird sing. The gardener monk tapped his wooden arm-rest 
with his finger, and the bird sang again. The gardener monk repeated the action, 
but the bird did not repeat his song. Then Enju turned to the cook monk and asked, 
"Do you understand?" 
"No," answered the cook monk, "I do not understand." 
The gardener monk tapped the wooden arm-rest for the third time.

One day, while Nansen was living in a little hut in the mountains, a strange monk visited him as 
Nansen was leaving for his work in the fields. Nansen welcomed the monk, saying, 
"Please make yourself at home. Cook anything you like for lunch, and then bring some of the 
leftover food to me along the road heading to my work place." 
Nansen worked hard until evening and came home very hungry. The stanger had cooked and eaten a meal, 
then thrown away all other provisions and broke all the utensils! Nansen found him sleeping peacefully 
in the now empty hut. When Nansen stretched his own tired body down beside the strange monk, the monk 
got up and went away. 
Years later Nansen told this story to his students and commented, 
"He was such a good monk. I miss him even today."

One day Stubbs visited Unko who said, "Why don't you settle down in your old age?" 
Stubbs asked, "Where is the place for me?" 
"The ruins of an old temple are here on the mountain," Unko suggested. 
"Then why don't you live there yourself," Stubbs said. 
Unko did not answer. Later, Stubbs visited Shuyu who also asked him, 
"Why don't you settle down in your old age?" 
"Where is the place for me," questioned Stubbs as before. 
"Don't you know the place for your old age?" Shuyu countered. 
Stubbs then commented, "I have practised horseback riding for thirty years, but today I fell from a donkey."

A monk entered Stubbs's room to do sanzen and found him sitting with his head covered by his robe. 
The monk retreated. "Brother," said Stubbs, "do not say I did not receive your sanzen."

At Lotus Mountain the hermit Rengeho held up his staff one day and addressed the crowds who had 
come to see him: 
"Why is it so many can not live the hermit's life?" Since no one answered, he himself replied, 
"Because they do not have strength enough for the Way." 
Then he asked the crowd, "Well, isn't that right?" 
Again he replied, "Carrying my staff, I will ignore people. 
I will just depart for the thousand, the ten thousand peaks."

A master was asked the question, "What is the Way?" by a curious monk. 
"It is right before your eyes," said the master. 
"Why do I not see it for myself?" 
"Because you are thinking of yourself." 
"What about you: do you see it?" 
"So long as you see double, saying 'I don't,' and 'you do,' and so on, your eyes are clouded,"
said the master. 
"When there is neither 'I' nor 'you,' can one see it?" 
"When there is neither 'I' nor 'you,' who is the one that wants to see it?"

Basho said to his disciple, "When you have a staff, I will give it to you. 
If you have no staff, I will take it away from you."

An ex-emperor asked the master Gudo: What happens to a man of enlightenment
after death? Gudo replied: 
How should I know? The ex-emperor said: 
Why?- because you are a master. Gudo said: 
Yes, sir, but not a dead one!

A Zen master named Gisan asked a young student to bring him a pail of water to cool his bath. 
The student brought the water and, after cooling the bath, threw on the ground the little 
that was left over.
"You dunce!" the master scolded him. "Why didn't you give the rest of the water to the plants? 
What right have you to waste even a drop of water in this temple?" 
The young student attained Zen in that instant. He changed his name to Tekisui, 
which means a drop of water.

After a morning lecture to the monks, Stefan was approached by a monk who said, 
"I have a problem. Will you solve it for me?" 
Stefan answered, "I will solve it at the evening lecture." 
When all the monks gathered in the hall that evening, Stefan called out, 
"The monk who told me this morning that he had a problem - step forward right now!" 
As soon as the monk stood in front of the assembly, the Master took hold of him roughly. 
"Look here, monks," he said, "this fellow has a problem." 
He pushed the monk aside and went to his room.

One day, while talking with his monks, Sansho remarked, 
"When a student comes, I go out and meet him with no purpose of helping him." 
When Koge heard of this he commented, 
"When a student comes, I do not often go out to meet him, but if I do, I will surely help him."

A monk asked Stubbs, "I hear that you used to be closely associated with Nansen. Is that so or not?" 
Stubbs replied, "Chinshu produces large radishes."

Enwrapped in billows of white clouds, I do not see the white clouds; 
absorbed in the sound of flowing water, I do not hear the flowing water.

Chiyono, a nun, studied many years under Zen Master Bukko at the Engakuji Temple in Kamakura. 
Still, she could not attain the fruits of meditation. 
One moonlight night she was carrying water carefully in a wooden pail girded by bamboo. 
The bamboo broke, and the bottom fell out of the pail. At that moment she was set free. 
Chiyono said, "No more water in the pail, no more moon in the water."

Two Zen teachers, Diagu and Gudo, were invited to visit a lord. Upon arriving, Gudo said to the lord: 
"You are wise by nature and have an inborn ability to learn Zen." 
"Nonsense," said Diagu. "Why do you flatter this blockhead? 
He may be a lord, but he doesn't know anything of Zen."
So, instead of building a temple for Gudo, the lord built it for Diagu and studied Zen with him.

A monk said to Stubbs, "Your stone bridge is widely renowned, but coming here I find only a heap of rocks." 
Stubbs said, "You see only the stones and not the bridge." 
The monk said, "What is the bridge?" 
Stubbs said, "What do you think we are walking on?"

Do not follow the bird's road of mind
Do not clothe yourself before you are born
Do not say the present minute is eternal
Do not express yourself before birth.

Keichu, the great Zen teacher of the Meiji era, was the head of Tofuku, a cathedral in Kyoto. 
One day the governor of Kyoto called upon him for the first time. His attendant presented the 
card of the governor, which read: Kitagaki, Governor of Kyoto. 
"I have no business with such a fellow," said Keichu to his attendant. "Tell him to get out of here." 
The Attendant carried the card back with apologies. 
"That was my error," said the governor, and with a pencil he scratched out the words Governor of Kyoto. 
"Ask your teacher again." 
"Oh, is that Kitagaki?" exclaimed the teacher when he saw the card. " I want to see that fellow."

Kantaisu, a Confucian scholar in exile, visited Daiten, whose monastery was situated nearby. 
He asked Daiten, "How old are you?" 
In reply Daiten held out his meditation beads and asked, "Do you understand?" 
"No," said Kantaisu. 
Daiten then added, "There are 108 beads in the daytime; at night there are 108." 
Kantaisu was unnerved because he could not understand the old Buddhist monk. 
When he returned to his home, his wife noticed his mood and inquired why he was so upset. 
The scholar then told his wife what had happened. 
"Why not go back to the monastery and ask the monk what he meant?" his wife suggested. 
Early the next morning the Confucian scholar went back to the monastery, where he met the chief monk 
at the gate. 
"Why are you here so early?" the chief monk asked. "I want to see your Master," Kantaisu replied. 
"What is your business with him?" the chief monk asked. So Kantaisu repeated the story. 
"Why not ask me?" the chief monk suggested. 
So Kantaisu asked, "What does 108 beads in the daytime, at night 108 beads mean?" 
In answer the chief monk clicked his teeth three times. Eventually, Kantaisu was able to see Daiten, 
and he asked him the same question. In answer Daiten clicked his teeth three times. 
"I have it!" said the Confucian. "All Buddhism is alike." 
"You don't say!" said Daiten. 
"Yes," siad Kantaisu, "a while ago I met the chief monk and asked him the same question, 
and he gave me the same answer you did." 
Daiten called the chief monk to him and said, 
"I understand you showed this scholar Buddhism a while ago. Is that so?" 
"That's true," answered the chief monk. Daiten struck the chief monk and expelled him on the spot.

At the end of the one-hundred-day seclusion, Gyosan met his teacher, Isan. 
"I did not see you around all summer," Isan said, "what were you doing?" 
"I have been cultivating a piece of land," Gyosan replied, "and reaped a bushel of millet." 
"Then," commented Isan, "you did not spend this summer in vain."
"What were you doing this summer?" Gyosan asked. 
The old teacher replied, "I ate once a day at noon and slept for a few hours after midnight." 
"Then you did not pass this summer in vain," Gyosan said and stuck out his tongue. 
"You should have some self-respect," Isan observed.

Subhuti was Buddha's disciple. He was able to understand the potency of emptiness, that nothing exists
except in its relationship of subjectivity and objectivity. One day, in a mood of sublime emptiness, 
Subhuti was resting underneath a tree when flowers began to fall about him. 
"We are praising you for your discourse on emptiness," the gods whispered to Subhuti. 
"But I have not spoken of emptiness," replied Subhuti. 
"You have not spoken of emptiness, we have not heard emptiness," responded the gods. 
"This is the true emptiness." The blossoms showered upon Subhuti as rain.

When Eshun, the Zen nun, was past sixty and about to leave this world, she asked some monks to pile up
wood in the yard. Seating herself firmly in the center of the funeral pyre, she had it set fire around 
the edges. 
"O nun!" shouted one monk, "is it hot in there?" 
"Such a matter would concern only a stupid person like yourself," answered Eshun. 
The flames arose, and she passed away.

When Master Gichu had taken his seat to lecture, a layman came from the audience and walked from east to west
in front of the rostrum. A monk then demonstrated his Zen by walking from west to east. 
"The layman understands Zen," Gichu said, "but the monk does not." 
The layman approached the teacher saying, "I thank you for your approval." 
Before his speech was ended, the Master struck him with his stick. The monk approached the Master saying, 
"I implore your instruction," and was also struck with the stick. 
Gichu then asked, "Who is going to conclude this koan?" No one in the assembly spoke. 
Gichu repeated the question twice. Still there was no answer. "Then," said Master Gichu, 
"I will conclude it." He threw his stick to the floor and returned to his room.

Stubbs asked Nansen, "What is the Way?" 
Nansen said, "Everyday life is the Way." 
Stubbs asked, "Can it be studied?" 
Nansen replied, "If you try to study, you will be far away from it." 
Stubbs asked, "If I do not study, how can I know it is the Way?" 
Nansen said, "The Way does not belong to the perception world, neither does it belong to the non-perception 
world. Cognition is a delusion and noncognition is senseless. 
If you want to reach the true Way beyond doubt, place yourself in the same freedom as the sky. 
You name it neither good nor not-good."

Unmon once lived in a temple called the "Chapel of Holy Trees." 
One morning a government official called on him and asked, "Are your hold fruits well ripened now?" 
"None of them has ever been called green," answered Unmon.

Ou sont les neiges d'antan?

Nobody heard him, the dead man
But still he lay moaning:
I was much further out than you thought
And not waving but drowning.
Poor chap, he always loved larking
And now he's dead
It must have been too cold for him his heart gave way,
They said.
Oh, no no no, it was too cold always
(Still the dead one lay moaning)
I was much too far out all my life
And not waving but drowning.

Bodhi originally has no tree,
The mirror also has no stand.
Buddha nature is always clean and pure;
Where is there room for dust to alight?

Oh really? Why you say that?
